php-generator/readme.md, before:

Nette PHP Generator
===================

[![Downloads this Month](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dm/nette/php-generator.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/nette/php-generator)
[![Tests](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/workflows/Tests/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/actions)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/nette/php-generator/badge.svg?branch=master&v=1)](https://coveralls.io/github/nette/php-generator?branch=master)
[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/nette/php-generator/v/stable)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-New%20BSD-blue.svg)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/blob/master/license.md)


Introduction
------------

Do you need to generate PHP code of classes, functions, namespaces, etc.? This library with a friendly API will help you.

Documentation can be found on the [website](https://doc.nette.org/php-generator). If you like it, **[please make a donation now](https://github.com/sponsors/dg)**. Thank you!

Installation:

```shell
composer require nette/php-generator
```

- PhpGenerator 3.2 – 3.5 is compatible with PHP 7.1 to 8.0
- PhpGenerator 3.1 is compatible with PHP 7.1 to 7.3
- PhpGenerator 3.0 is compatible with PHP 7.0 to 7.3
- PhpGenerator 2.6 is compatible with PHP 5.6 to 7.3



Classes
-------

Let's start with a straightforward example of generating class using [ClassType](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/ClassType.html):

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');

$class
	->setFinal()
	->setExtends(ParentClass::class)
	->addImplement(Countable::class)
	->addTrait(Nette\SmartObject::class)
	->addComment("Description of class.\nSecond line\n")
	->addComment('@property-read Nette\Forms\Form $form');

// to generate PHP code simply cast to string or use echo:
echo $class;
```

It will render this result:

```php
/**
 * Description of class.
 * Second line
 *
 * @property-read Nette\Forms\Form $form
 */
final class Demo extends ParentClass implements Countable
{
	use Nette\SmartObject;
}
```

We can also use a printer to generate the code, which, unlike `echo $class`, we will be able to further configure:

```php
$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer;
echo $printer->printClass($class);
```

We can add constants ([Constant](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Constant.html)) and properties ([Property](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Property.html)):

```php
$class->addConstant('ID', 123)
	->setPrivate(); // constant visiblity

$class->addProperty('items', [1, 2, 3])
	->setPrivate() // or setVisibility('private')
	->setStatic()
	->addComment('@var int[]');

$class->addProperty('list')
	->setType('array')
	->setNullable()
	->setInitialized(); // prints '= null'
```

It generates:

```php
private const ID = 123;

/** @var int[] */
private static $items = [1, 2, 3];

public ?array $list = null;
```

And we can add methods with parameters:

```php
$method = $class->addMethod('count')
	->addComment('Count it.')
	->addComment('@return int')
	->setFinal()
	->setProtected()
	->setReturnType('int') // method return type
	->setReturnNullable() // nullable return type
	->setBody('return count($items ?: $this->items);');

$method->addParameter('items', []) // $items = []
		->setReference()           // &$items = []
		->setType('array');        // array &$items = []
```

It results in:

```php
/**
 * Count it.
 * @return int
 */
final protected function count(array &$items = []): ?int
{
	return count($items ?: $this->items);
}
```

Promoted parameters introduced by PHP 8.0 can be passed to the constructor:

```php
$method = $class->addMethod('__construct');
$method->addPromotedParameter('name');
$method->addPromotedParameter('args', [])
		->setPrivate();
```

It results in:

```php
public function __construct(
	public $name,
	private $args = [],
) {
}
```

If the property, constant, method or parameter already exist, it will be overwritten.

Members can be removed using `removeProperty()`, `removeConstant()`, `removeMethod()` or `removeParameter()`.

You can also add existing `Method`, `Property` or `Constant` objects to the class:

```php
$method = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Method('getHandle');
$property = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Property('handle');
$const = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Constant('ROLE');

$class = (new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo'))
	->addMember($method)
	->addMember($property)
	->addMember($const);
```

You can clone existing methods, properties and constants with a different name using `cloneWithName()`:

```php
$methodCount = $class->getMethod('count');
$methodRecount = $methodCount->cloneWithName('recount');
$class->addMember($methodRecount);
```

Types
-----

Each type or union type can be passed as a string, you can also use predefined constants for native types:

```php
use Nette\PhpGenerator\Type;

$member->setType('array');
$member->setType(Type::ARRAY);
$member->setType('array|string');
$member->setType(null); // removes type
```

The same applies to the method `setReturnType()`.


Tabs versus Spaces
------------------

The generated code uses tabs for indentation. If you want to have the output compatible with PSR-2 or PSR-12, use `PsrPrinter`:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
// ...

$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter;
echo $printer->printClass($class); // 4 spaces indentation
```


Interface or Trait
------------------

You can create interfaces and traits in a similar way, just change the type:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('DemoInterface');
$class->setInterface();
// or $class->setTrait();
```

Literals
--------

You can pass any PHP code to property or parameter default values via `Literal`:

```php
use Nette\PhpGenerator\Literal;

$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');

$class->addProperty('foo', new Literal('Iterator::SELF_FIRST'));

$class->addMethod('bar')
	->addParameter('id', new Literal('1 + 2'));

echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
class Demo
{
	public $foo = Iterator::SELF_FIRST;

	public function bar($id = 1 + 2)
	{
	}
}
```

Using Traits
------------

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
$class->addTrait('SmartObject');
$class->addTrait('MyTrait', ['sayHello as protected']);
echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
class Demo
{
	use SmartObject;
	use MyTrait {
		sayHello as protected;
	}
}
```

Anonymous Class
---------------

Give `null` as the name and you have an anonymous class:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType(null);
$class->addMethod('__construct')
	->addParameter('foo');

echo '$obj = new class ($val) ' . $class . ';';
```

Result:

```php
$obj = new class ($val) {

	public function __construct($foo)
	{
	}
};
```

Global Function
---------------

Code of functions will generate class [GlobalFunction](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/GlobalFunction.html):

```php
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$function->addParameter('a');
$function->addParameter('b');
echo $function;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printFunction($function);
```

Result:

```php
function foo($a, $b)
{
	return $a + $b;
}
```

Closure
-------

Code of closures will generate class [Closure](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Closure.html):

```php
$closure = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure;
$closure->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$closure->addParameter('a');
$closure->addParameter('b');
$closure->addUse('c')
	->setReference();
echo $closure;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printClosure($closure);
```

Result:

```php
function ($a, $b) use (&$c) {
	return $a + $b;
}
```

Arrow Function
--------------

You can also print closure as arrow function using printer:

```php
$closure = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure;
$closure->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$closure->addParameter('a');
$closure->addParameter('b');

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer)->printArrowFunction($closure);
```

Result:

```php
fn ($a, $b) => $a + $b
```

Attributes
----------

You can add PHP 8 attributes to all classes, methods, properties, constants, functions, closures and parameters.

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
$class->addAttribute('Deprecated');

$class->addProperty('list')
	->addAttribute('WithArguments', [1, 2]);

$method = $class->addMethod('count')
	->addAttribute('Foo\Cached', ['mode' => true]);

$method->addParameter('items')
	->addAttribute('Bar');

echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
#[Deprecated]
class Demo
{
	#[WithArguments(1, 2)]
	public $list;


	#[Foo\Cached(mode: true)]
	public function count(#[Bar] $items)
	{
	}
}
```

Method and Function Body Generator
----------------------------------

The body can be passed to the `setBody()` method at once or sequentially (line by line) by repeatedly calling `addBody()`:

```php
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addBody('$a = rand(10, 20);');
$function->addBody('return $a;');
echo $function;
```

Result

```php
function foo()
{
	$a = rand(10, 20);
	return $a;
}
```

You can use special placeholders for handy way to inject variables.

Simple placeholders `?`

```php
$str = 'any string';
$num = 3;
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addBody('return strlen(?, ?);', [$str, $num]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo()
{
	return strlen('any string', 3);
}
```

Variadic placeholder `...?`

```php
$items = [1, 2, 3];
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->setBody('myfunc(...?);', [$items]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo()
{
	myfunc(1, 2, 3);
}
```

You can also use PHP 8 named parameters using placeholder `...?:`

```php
$items = ['foo' => 1, 'bar' => true];
$function->setBody('myfunc(...?:);', [$items]);

// myfunc(foo: 1, bar: true);
```

Escape placeholder using slash `\?`

```php
$num = 3;
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addParameter('a');
$function->addBody('return $a \? 10 : ?;', [$num]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo($a)
{
	return $a ? 10 : 3;
}
```

Namespace
---------

Classes, traits and interfaces (hereinafter classes) can be grouped into namespaces ([PhpNamespace](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/PhpNamespace.html)):

```php
$namespace = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo');

// create new classes in the namespace
$class = $namespace->addClass('Task');
$interface = $namespace->addInterface('Countable');
$trait = $namespace->addTrait('NameAware');

// or insert an existing class into the namespace
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Task');
$namespace->add($class);
```

If the class already exists, it will be overwritten.

You can define use-statements:

```php
// use Http\Request;
$namespace->addUse(Http\Request::class);
// use Http\Request as HttpReq;
$namespace->addUse(Http\Request::class, 'HttpReq');
```

Class Names Resolving
---------------------

**When the class is part of the namespace, it is rendered slightly differently**: all types (ie. type hints, return types, parent class name,
implemented interfaces, used traits and attributes) are automatically *resolved* (unless you turn it off, see below).
It means that you have to **use full class names** in definitions and they will be replaced
with aliases (according to the use-statements) or fully qualified names in the resulting code:

```php
$namespace = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo');
$namespace->addUse('Bar\AliasedClass');

$class = $namespace->addClass('Demo');
$class->addImplement('Foo\A') // it will resolve to A
	->addTrait('Bar\AliasedClass'); // it will resolve to AliasedClass

$method = $class->addMethod('method');
$method->addComment('@return ' . $namespace->unresolveName('Foo\D')); // in comments resolve manually
$method->addParameter('arg')
	->setType('Bar\OtherClass'); // it will resolve to \Bar\OtherClass

echo $namespace;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printNamespace($namespace);
```

Result:

```php
namespace Foo;

use Bar\AliasedClass;

class Demo implements A
{
	use AliasedClass;

	/**
	 * @return D
	 */
	public function method(\Bar\OtherClass $arg)
	{
	}
}
```

Auto-resolving can be turned off this way:

```php
$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer; // or PsrPrinter
$printer->setTypeResolving(false);
echo $printer->printNamespace($namespace);
```

PHP Files
---------

Classes and namespaces can be grouped into PHP files represented by the class [PhpFile](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/PhpFile.html):

```php
$file = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpFile;
$file->addComment('This file is auto-generated.');
$file->setStrictTypes(); // adds declare(strict_types=1)

$namespace = $file->addNamespace('Foo');
$class = $namespace->addClass('A');
$class->addMethod('hello');

// or insert an existing namespace into the file
// $file->addNamespace(new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo'));

echo $file;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printFile($file);
```

Result:

```php
<?php

/**
 * This file is auto-generated.
 */

declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Foo;

class A
{
	public function hello()
	{
	}
}
```

Generate using Reflection
-------------------------

Another common use case is to create class or method based on existing ones:

```php
$class = Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType::from(PDO::class);

$function = Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction::from('trim');

$closure = Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure::from(
	function (stdClass $a, $b = null) {}
);
```

Method bodies are empty by default. If you want to load them as well, use this way
(it requires `nikic/php-parser` to be installed):

```php
$class = Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType::withBodiesFrom(MyClass::class);

$function = Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction::withBodyFrom('dump');
```


Variables Dumper
----------------

The Dumper returns a parsable PHP string representation of a variable. Provides better and clearer output that native functon `var_export()`.

```php
$dumper = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Dumper;

$var = ['a', 'b', 123];

echo $dumper->dump($var); // prints ['a', 'b', 123]
```

Custom Printer
--------------

Need to customize printer behavior? Create your own by inheriting the `Printer` class. You can reconfigure these variables:

```php
class MyPrinter extends Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer
{
	protected $indentation = "\t";
	protected $linesBetweenProperties = 0;
	protected $linesBetweenMethods = 1;
	protected $returnTypeColon = ': ';
}
```

Commit message:

[php-generator] readme: added support me
nette/php-generator@710e6c7

php-generator/readme.md, after:

Nette PHP Generator
===================

[![Downloads this Month](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dm/nette/php-generator.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/nette/php-generator)
[![Tests](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/workflows/Tests/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/actions)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/nette/php-generator/badge.svg?branch=master&v=1)](https://coveralls.io/github/nette/php-generator?branch=master)
[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/nette/php-generator/v/stable)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-New%20BSD-blue.svg)](https://github.com/nette/php-generator/blob/master/license.md)


Introduction
------------

Do you need to generate PHP code of classes, functions, namespaces, etc.? This library with a friendly API will help you.

Documentation can be found on the [website](https://doc.nette.org/php-generator).


[Support Me](https://github.com/sponsors/dg)
--------------------------------------------

Do you like PHP Generator? Are you looking forward to the new features?

[![Buy me a coffee](https://files.nette.org/icons/donation-3.svg)](https://github.com/sponsors/dg)

Thank you!


Installation
------------

```shell
composer require nette/php-generator
```

- PhpGenerator 3.2 – 3.5 is compatible with PHP 7.1 to 8.0
- PhpGenerator 3.1 is compatible with PHP 7.1 to 7.3
- PhpGenerator 3.0 is compatible with PHP 7.0 to 7.3
- PhpGenerator 2.6 is compatible with PHP 5.6 to 7.3



Classes
-------

Let's start with a straightforward example of generating class using [ClassType](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/ClassType.html):

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');

$class
	->setFinal()
	->setExtends(ParentClass::class)
	->addImplement(Countable::class)
	->addTrait(Nette\SmartObject::class)
	->addComment("Description of class.\nSecond line\n")
	->addComment('@property-read Nette\Forms\Form $form');

// to generate PHP code simply cast to string or use echo:
echo $class;
```

It will render this result:

```php
/**
 * Description of class.
 * Second line
 *
 * @property-read Nette\Forms\Form $form
 */
final class Demo extends ParentClass implements Countable
{
	use Nette\SmartObject;
}
```

We can also use a printer to generate the code, which, unlike `echo $class`, we will be able to further configure:

```php
$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer;
echo $printer->printClass($class);
```

We can add constants ([Constant](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Constant.html)) and properties ([Property](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Property.html)):

```php
$class->addConstant('ID', 123)
	->setPrivate(); // constant visiblity

$class->addProperty('items', [1, 2, 3])
	->setPrivate() // or setVisibility('private')
	->setStatic()
	->addComment('@var int[]');

$class->addProperty('list')
	->setType('array')
	->setNullable()
	->setInitialized(); // prints '= null'
```

It generates:

```php
private const ID = 123;

/** @var int[] */
private static $items = [1, 2, 3];

public ?array $list = null;
```

And we can add methods with parameters:

```php
$method = $class->addMethod('count')
	->addComment('Count it.')
	->addComment('@return int')
	->setFinal()
	->setProtected()
	->setReturnType('int') // method return type
	->setReturnNullable() // nullable return type
	->setBody('return count($items ?: $this->items);');

$method->addParameter('items', []) // $items = []
		->setReference()           // &$items = []
		->setType('array');        // array &$items = []
```

It results in:

```php
/**
 * Count it.
 * @return int
 */
final protected function count(array &$items = []): ?int
{
	return count($items ?: $this->items);
}
```

Promoted parameters introduced by PHP 8.0 can be passed to the constructor:

```php
$method = $class->addMethod('__construct');
$method->addPromotedParameter('name');
$method->addPromotedParameter('args', [])
		->setPrivate();
```

It results in:

```php
public function __construct(
	public $name,
	private $args = [],
) {
}
```

If the property, constant, method or parameter already exist, it will be overwritten.

Members can be removed using `removeProperty()`, `removeConstant()`, `removeMethod()` or `removeParameter()`.

You can also add existing `Method`, `Property` or `Constant` objects to the class:

```php
$method = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Method('getHandle');
$property = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Property('handle');
$const = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Constant('ROLE');

$class = (new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo'))
	->addMember($method)
	->addMember($property)
	->addMember($const);
```

You can clone existing methods, properties and constants with a different name using `cloneWithName()`:

```php
$methodCount = $class->getMethod('count');
$methodRecount = $methodCount->cloneWithName('recount');
$class->addMember($methodRecount);
```

Types
-----

Each type or union type can be passed as a string, you can also use predefined constants for native types:

```php
use Nette\PhpGenerator\Type;

$member->setType('array');
$member->setType(Type::ARRAY);
$member->setType('array|string');
$member->setType(null); // removes type
```

The same applies to the method `setReturnType()`.


Tabs versus Spaces
------------------

The generated code uses tabs for indentation. If you want to have the output compatible with PSR-2 or PSR-12, use `PsrPrinter`:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
// ...

$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter;
echo $printer->printClass($class); // 4 spaces indentation
```


Interface or Trait
------------------

You can create interfaces and traits in a similar way, just change the type:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('DemoInterface');
$class->setInterface();
// or $class->setTrait();
```

Literals
--------

You can pass any PHP code to property or parameter default values via `Literal`:

```php
use Nette\PhpGenerator\Literal;

$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');

$class->addProperty('foo', new Literal('Iterator::SELF_FIRST'));

$class->addMethod('bar')
	->addParameter('id', new Literal('1 + 2'));

echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
class Demo
{
	public $foo = Iterator::SELF_FIRST;

	public function bar($id = 1 + 2)
	{
	}
}
```

Using Traits
------------

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
$class->addTrait('SmartObject');
$class->addTrait('MyTrait', ['sayHello as protected']);
echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
class Demo
{
	use SmartObject;
	use MyTrait {
		sayHello as protected;
	}
}
```

Anonymous Class
---------------

Give `null` as the name and you have an anonymous class:

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType(null);
$class->addMethod('__construct')
	->addParameter('foo');

echo '$obj = new class ($val) ' . $class . ';';
```

Result:

```php
$obj = new class ($val) {

	public function __construct($foo)
	{
	}
};
```

Global Function
---------------

Code of functions will generate class [GlobalFunction](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/GlobalFunction.html):

```php
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$function->addParameter('a');
$function->addParameter('b');
echo $function;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printFunction($function);
```

Result:

```php
function foo($a, $b)
{
	return $a + $b;
}
```

Closure
-------

Code of closures will generate class [Closure](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/Closure.html):

```php
$closure = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure;
$closure->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$closure->addParameter('a');
$closure->addParameter('b');
$closure->addUse('c')
	->setReference();
echo $closure;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printClosure($closure);
```

Result:

```php
function ($a, $b) use (&$c) {
	return $a + $b;
}
```

Arrow Function
--------------

You can also print closure as arrow function using printer:

```php
$closure = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure;
$closure->setBody('return $a + $b;');
$closure->addParameter('a');
$closure->addParameter('b');

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer)->printArrowFunction($closure);
```

Result:

```php
fn ($a, $b) => $a + $b
```

Attributes
----------

You can add PHP 8 attributes to all classes, methods, properties, constants, functions, closures and parameters.

```php
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Demo');
$class->addAttribute('Deprecated');

$class->addProperty('list')
	->addAttribute('WithArguments', [1, 2]);

$method = $class->addMethod('count')
	->addAttribute('Foo\Cached', ['mode' => true]);

$method->addParameter('items')
	->addAttribute('Bar');

echo $class;
```

Result:

```php
#[Deprecated]
class Demo
{
	#[WithArguments(1, 2)]
	public $list;


	#[Foo\Cached(mode: true)]
	public function count(#[Bar] $items)
	{
	}
}
```

Method and Function Body Generator
----------------------------------

The body can be passed to the `setBody()` method at once or sequentially (line by line) by repeatedly calling `addBody()`:

```php
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addBody('$a = rand(10, 20);');
$function->addBody('return $a;');
echo $function;
```

Result

```php
function foo()
{
	$a = rand(10, 20);
	return $a;
}
```

You can use special placeholders for handy way to inject variables.

Simple placeholders `?`

```php
$str = 'any string';
$num = 3;
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addBody('return strlen(?, ?);', [$str, $num]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo()
{
	return strlen('any string', 3);
}
```

Variadic placeholder `...?`

```php
$items = [1, 2, 3];
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->setBody('myfunc(...?);', [$items]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo()
{
	myfunc(1, 2, 3);
}
```

You can also use PHP 8 named parameters using placeholder `...?:`

```php
$items = ['foo' => 1, 'bar' => true];
$function->setBody('myfunc(...?:);', [$items]);

// myfunc(foo: 1, bar: true);
```

Escape placeholder using slash `\?`

```php
$num = 3;
$function = new Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction('foo');
$function->addParameter('a');
$function->addBody('return $a \? 10 : ?;', [$num]);
echo $function;
```

Result:

```php
function foo($a)
{
	return $a ? 10 : 3;
}
```

Namespace
---------

Classes, traits and interfaces (hereinafter classes) can be grouped into namespaces ([PhpNamespace](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/PhpNamespace.html)):

```php
$namespace = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo');

// create new classes in the namespace
$class = $namespace->addClass('Task');
$interface = $namespace->addInterface('Countable');
$trait = $namespace->addTrait('NameAware');

// or insert an existing class into the namespace
$class = new Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType('Task');
$namespace->add($class);
```

If the class already exists, it will be overwritten.

You can define use-statements:

```php
// use Http\Request;
$namespace->addUse(Http\Request::class);
// use Http\Request as HttpReq;
$namespace->addUse(Http\Request::class, 'HttpReq');
```

Class Names Resolving
---------------------

**When the class is part of the namespace, it is rendered slightly differently**: all types (ie. type hints, return types, parent class name,
implemented interfaces, used traits and attributes) are automatically *resolved* (unless you turn it off, see below).
It means that you have to **use full class names** in definitions and they will be replaced
with aliases (according to the use-statements) or fully qualified names in the resulting code:

```php
$namespace = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo');
$namespace->addUse('Bar\AliasedClass');

$class = $namespace->addClass('Demo');
$class->addImplement('Foo\A') // it will resolve to A
	->addTrait('Bar\AliasedClass'); // it will resolve to AliasedClass

$method = $class->addMethod('method');
$method->addComment('@return ' . $namespace->unresolveName('Foo\D')); // in comments resolve manually
$method->addParameter('arg')
	->setType('Bar\OtherClass'); // it will resolve to \Bar\OtherClass

echo $namespace;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printNamespace($namespace);
```

Result:

```php
namespace Foo;

use Bar\AliasedClass;

class Demo implements A
{
	use AliasedClass;

	/**
	 * @return D
	 */
	public function method(\Bar\OtherClass $arg)
	{
	}
}
```

Auto-resolving can be turned off this way:

```php
$printer = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer; // or PsrPrinter
$printer->setTypeResolving(false);
echo $printer->printNamespace($namespace);
```

PHP Files
---------

Classes and namespaces can be grouped into PHP files represented by the class [PhpFile](https://api.nette.org/3.0/Nette/PhpGenerator/PhpFile.html):

```php
$file = new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpFile;
$file->addComment('This file is auto-generated.');
$file->setStrictTypes(); // adds declare(strict_types=1)

$namespace = $file->addNamespace('Foo');
$class = $namespace->addClass('A');
$class->addMethod('hello');

// or insert an existing namespace into the file
// $file->addNamespace(new Nette\PhpGenerator\PhpNamespace('Foo'));

echo $file;

// or use PsrPrinter for output compatible with PSR-2 / PSR-12
// echo (new Nette\PhpGenerator\PsrPrinter)->printFile($file);
```

Result:

```php
<?php

/**
 * This file is auto-generated.
 */

declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Foo;

class A
{
	public function hello()
	{
	}
}
```

Generate using Reflection
-------------------------

Another common use case is to create class or method based on existing ones:

```php
$class = Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType::from(PDO::class);

$function = Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction::from('trim');

$closure = Nette\PhpGenerator\Closure::from(
	function (stdClass $a, $b = null) {}
);
```

Method bodies are empty by default. If you want to load them as well, use this way
(it requires `nikic/php-parser` to be installed):

```php
$class = Nette\PhpGenerator\ClassType::withBodiesFrom(MyClass::class);

$function = Nette\PhpGenerator\GlobalFunction::withBodyFrom('dump');
```


Variables Dumper
----------------

The Dumper returns a parsable PHP string representation of a variable. Provides better and clearer output that native functon `var_export()`.

```php
$dumper = new Nette\PhpGenerator\Dumper;

$var = ['a', 'b', 123];

echo $dumper->dump($var); // prints ['a', 'b', 123]
```

Custom Printer
--------------

Need to customize printer behavior? Create your own by inheriting the `Printer` class. You can reconfigure these variables:

```php
class MyPrinter extends Nette\PhpGenerator\Printer
{
	protected $indentation = "\t";
	protected $linesBetweenProperties = 0;
	protected $linesBetweenMethods = 1;
	protected $returnTypeColon = ': ';
}
```
